# Blend: The digital lending platform of the future?

## Company Overview and Origins

  If I mention the word Blend, you may very likely begin to scroll through mental images of a freshly prepared fruit smoothie, or perhaps a thick milkshake with all the fixings from the local ice cream parlor to satisfy your sweet tooth cravings. Perhaps, if you are a bit more health conscious, you may thave a sudden urge to drive down the street to Whole Foods for a Mango-Mint Green Smoothie for breakfast. What is not likely is that you would think of a Fintech company that is reshaping the way that banks and other money lenders meet the needs of the demanding banking and lending industry. 

If you have ever been in front a loan officer while you apply for a mortgage or personal loan, or in front of a finance manager at a car dealership, you have likely experienced the intimidating and confusing process of applying for a loan to obtain your big ticket item. This is unlike the 5 minute process at your local retailer that is offering you a store credit card with the promise of a tempting discount while you checkout at the register. We're talking about detailed questions, personal information, as well as sensitive and private documentation that needs to be provided in order for the lender to make a determination of your creditworthiness for the transaction. The lender needs to determine if you have the financial capacity and are likely to repay the debt as agreed. They also need to ensure that the collateral is acceptable in order to extend the credit approval. Needless to say, there are many moving parts that take place in order for an individual to be credit approved. When you hear the words, "congratulations, your loan is approved" it is a huge sigh of relief. However, in most cases, the phrase is follwed by, "we'll only need the following things from you in order to finalize the transaction." It is no wonder why the average consumer entering the lending process is left wondering why more things are needed if their loan was already approved!

This "clear as mud reality" has earned this tedious process a pretty bad reputation. This is exactly what happened to Nima Ghamsari's parents when they set out to accomplish the American Dream of homeownership. His parents were new immigrants from Iran working on finishing their graduate programs, when they ventured into the home buying process. With little money for downpayment, they had to rely on the help and expertise of their mortgage banker. Luckily, they were able to achieve their goal of homeownership, but not without feeling lost and confused along the way. The disconnect in the process was not with the mortgage banker but it had all to do with the process. As a young boy, Nima remembers first hand the process that his family went through. While Blend was officially started in 2012, some might argue that the company started in Nima's bedroom. In the "Our Origins" video on the company website, Nima's mom tells the story of how Nima built his own computer and how he had computer parts scattered all over his bedroom floor. Nima, through his family's experience, set out on a mission to help consumers identify that they are qualified for these products like mortgages and car loans, and to give them a platform that would make these products more accesible to them. Nima, Blend's Co-founder and Head, found a great way to 'blend' together passion and purpose.

Apparently, this ambitious goal resonated with many others who began to invest in this new idea since the company first opened for business on June 1, 2012. Since this time, the company has successfully garnered the trust and financial support from its investors in the amount of $665M through 10 rounds of funding. If you fast forward to July 16, 2021, the company has experienced exponential market growth and the company went public under the ticker NYSE:BLND. As published on Nasdaq.com, $360M was raised at this time and Blend received a market valuation of $4B with their IPO share price set at $18. Quite a long way from building a computer on the floor of his bedroom, to the creation and launch of Blend, to showcasing the company before a global audience standing at the brass bell podium of the New York Stock Exchange. Way to go Nima!

---
## The Analog and Digital Divide

Using Blend's own words, as published on their company website, "we're a growing team of tight-knit problem solvers on a mission to make financial services simpler, faster and more accessible." The company's goal is to make the process of applying for a loan, or a financial service, a more streamlined and user friendly process. So what is the dilemma that needs to be solved? After all, banking institutions are established and set in their ways, right? And anyone that needs to borrower money will need to just suck it up and endure the pain, right? 

The lending process is historically a cringeworthy and intimidating process that leaves many consumers licking their wounds once everything is said and done. The lending process is also highly susceptible to fraud from the consumer side, and illegal practices from the lender side, which has yielded a heavily regulated industry in order to protect the average consumer from predatory lending practices and the lending institutions from being defrauded. It is no wonder why banking and lending institutions are set in their ways. By adding layers to a process they can establish controls and by requiring paperwork and mountains of documentation they can deter fraud and document compliance. However, even before the pandemic, banking institutions were faced with the new kid on the block, fintech, which is disrupting an otherwise established and traditional industry. Traditional banks and money lenders are faced with a growing need to evolve in order to meet the customer expectations for better digital processes and services. After all, the market share for fintechs has widened and deepened wth the advent of social distancing, stay at home orders, and remote work. Not to mention the rising demand for digital-only offerings as generational wealth and asset transfers from Baby Boomers to Millenials is well underway.

Blend's intended customer is any financial organization that is looking to modernize its lending and financial services platforms from analog to digital. Large national banks like Wells Fargo are among those who have implemented the transformation of their traditional methods for loan and financial services applications. Other key players in the U.S banking industry like the Canadian based BMO Harris Bank, with it's US Headquarters in Chicago, IL, are adopting this change one business unit at a time through their business transformation initiatives. BMO Harris Bank started to utilize Blend's technology in their consumer lending division to improve the customer experience, which is the staple of the BMO Harris Bank brand.

Let's face it, fintechs are not only the new kid on the block, they are also the cool kid on the block. They are the ones with the cool gadgets and thingamabobs. Many banks, lenders, and start-ups are providing similar solutions for the industry as fintechs, but it is growing increasingly harder for them to keep up. Most are specific to either mortgages, personal loans and lines of credit, or credit cards and online banking. The approach that Blend has taken is to infiltrate the mortgage and real estate domain by providing solutions to a mortgage applicant that include referrals for real estate agents, insurance agents, and title companies through the same platform that is helping them get mortgage approved. Furthermore, the same platform can also be used to access other financial services offered by the financial institution. The technology provided by Blend is what goes "under the hood" once it has been integrated with the financial institution's APIs. This technology like Mulesoft and Postgres, and AWS technologies like Snowflake, S3, EC2, among others, is what enables Blend to process $5 billion in average loan volume per day, as published on the company's website. This is an impressive boost to banks looking to regain the upper hand in mortgage lending. a recent article from the Wall Street Journal revealed that, "nonbank mortgage lenders in the US issued 68.1% of all mortgages originated in 2020, up from 58.9% in 2019. In order to remain competitive, traditional banks are looking to fintech for help beefing up their digital presence and future growth.

---

## Company Landscape

Blend entered the world of fintech via the Mortgage/Real Estate domain but has now expanded into the personal finance/deposits domain. While the mortgage/real estate domain continues to be Blend's flagship, they are looking toward the continual expansion into different realms of lending including home equity loans, personal loans, credit cards, auto loans and deposit accounts.

Over the past 10-15 years, the banking and lending industry has been forced to modernize significantly from traditional paper to paperless, analog technologies during the early 2000s. From that most recent modernization, the industry is diving heavily into the digitalization era where a mortgage transaction can be completely digital and streamlined using an app from application through closing. This new way of working is helping the industry to save large amounts of resources by reducing business costs related to printing hundreds of pages throughout the loan process. Typically, loan closing packages contain hundreds of pages that require wet signatures and are later scanned and imaged for archiving. By offering a solution through the use of applications for the mortgage application and closing process, loan closings can now occur without a single page being printed, by using a tablet or mobile device, for example. Loan closing agents (notaries) receive the digital copies of the loan closing package and by using digital signatures and digital notary stamps, the loan packages can be signed in a fraction of the time and cost thanks to Blend's recent acquisition of Title365.

Competitors like LendingTree and Rocket Mortgage (formerly known as Quicken Loans) are among some of the most recognized competitors fighting for a piece of the market share pie. Lending Tree connects the consumer with lenders for the consumer's specific needs. For example, if a consumer requires a mortgage loan, Lending Tree will collect the consumer's information and based on a specified data set, they will generate a list of lenders that the consumer is compatible with. Once a selection is made by the consumer, they will be connected with the lender and if they wish to proceed, they will start the application process with the lender. Rocket Mortgage, on the other hand, has a mortgage specific product that is not relevant for anyonethat is not seeking a mortgage. Consumer digital lending is only expected to continue to grow in the United States with new players that are entering this competitive landscape like SoFi, and GreenSky, which are newer to the digital lending platform. Traditional banks are faced with a hard question to answer...do they build, buy, or partner to obtain the technology they need to remain competitive? Larger institutions like JP Morgan Chase can allocate the resources they need to compete, while other smaller banking institutions are finding that partnering with fintechs like Blend is their ticket to relevance in the current and future marketplace.

---

## Results Driven

Blend's customer base has experienced increased revenue, increased application submission rates as well as reduced loan cycle times. As published in "2021 In Review" on Blend's company website, some consumers have experienced 10 minute closings, which historically range between 30-60 minutes when no issues or delays are encountered. As a result, the consumer's experience has been positive. Blend's acquisition of Title365 has significantly contributed to the company's growth and ability to deliver a more seamless mortgage application experience for its customer base.

The success of any bank or money lender is heavily reliant on the institution's ability to maintain a high pull through rate (amount of loans that progress from application all the way through funding), maintaining a minimal decision-to-close time cycle, and a high application approval rate (how ready is your loan application process). Blend is publishing extraordinary results from its customer base that include rave reviews of meeting and exceeding these core metrics. All of this boils down to profitability and growth, which is a constant accolade coming from Blend's client base.

Blend is helping its customer base remain competitive and relevant in the extremely competitive marketplace. Blend customer, Wells Fargo, has reported 13% in increased revenues and an 86% increase in profits during Q4 in 2021 as published in the Wall Street Journal. Blend is experiencing exponential growth as they help their customers transition from traditional banking to digital banking in order to compete with alternative lending providers.

---

## Looking toward the future

From a business standpoint, there are many levels of human interaction to get one mortgage transaction to close and fund. Along the way there are a lot of opportunities for human error that can cause delays in the process or financial losses for the institution in time and resources. In an effort to deliver more robust and relevant solutions for end customers in this domain, my recommendation for Blend would be the addition of automated processing and underwriting to remain compliant all while reducing the human error component. Many consumers want minimal human interaction, or human interaction on their terms. I would propose the creation of a new product offering that will work with the automated underwriting systems used by Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to completely automate the processing and underwriting process, and to allow the loan applicant the ability to provide the loan conditions quickly and effortlessly through the app or web portal according to the guidelines established by the bank and/or end investor.

It is safe to say that in the words of West Monroe, "The one-on one relationships between banks and customers isn't disappearing-but it is evolving as more modern, digital capabilities take center stage."

By providing solutions like these for the industry, Blend can provide the banking and money lending oinstitutions an opportunity to expand their reach and grow their footprint. By implementing a robust, automated processing and underwriting process, the consumer will be able to work with the bank or money lender on their terms and when convenient for them. Since an app is available 24/7, the consumer does not have to wait for a reply to an email or a phone call back. The consumer can receive an answer to their questions right away and, quite possibly, a loan decision right away as well. In order to achieve this, Blend would need to implement AI technologies like Machine Learning Platforms, Virtual Agents, Decision Management, Deep Learning Platforms and Robotic Process Automation to add this sought after product offering.

The consumer will be provided with a seamless application process that will greatly improve the customer experience. By integrating these technologies, the consumer will be able to be progress through the pre-set milestones, always knowing where they are at in the process. By using these technologies, Blend can empower the end client to always have contact with the consumer, no matter the day or time. This will result in improved customer engagement and customer satisfaction while helping to secure customer retention. This technology can also be utilized to work with consumers from multiple backgrounds, removing language barriers and providing accurate and compliant information for the consumer in their preferred language.

In the art world, blending is the technique used to interminglee two or more colors to create a gradual transitio or to soften hard lines. In fintech, Blend has devised a way to intermingle growth and opportunity, institutiions and consumers, traditional institutions and fintech, needs and solutions, and most importantly, passion and purpose.

---

## Sources Addendum:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2022/04/05/mortgage-incumbents-have-two-fintech-choices-in-2022-use-or-lose/?sh=3f433e722e19

https://builtin.com/company/blend

https://tcrn.ch/3kETTSX

https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/blend-labs/company_financials

https://www.nasdaq.com/market-activity/ipos/financial-filings?dealId=1164602-98089

https://techcrunch.com/2021/07/16/digital-lending-platform-blend-valued-at-over-4b-in-its-public-debut/

https://www.google.com/search?q=who+is+blend.com%27s+competitor&oq=who+is+blend.com%27s+competitor&aqs=chrome..69i57j33i160.9006j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8

https://blend.com/blog/blend-momentum/2021-lookback/

https://blend.com/customers/bmo-harris-bank/

https://www.wsj.com/articles/wells-fargos-quarterly-profit-soars-86-11642162476

https://www.westmonroe.com/perspectives/report/2022-banking-outlook?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=banking%20trends&utm_content=!acq!v3!136801937472_kwd-21362231__595925946638_g_c__&utm_campaign=Banking+Playbook&atrkid=V3ADWED098667_136801937472_kwd-21362231__595925946638_g_c___&gclid=CjwKCAjw77WVBhBuEiwAJ-YoJLDp_5w754AZyMx0_qBXvzhSLMQ6mRQCZiQyCjyoCnSngCuj3Hc6FRoCOs0QAvD_BwE


file:///Users/miguelramos/Downloads/2022_Banking_Outlook.pdf | 2022 Banking Outlook Report from West Monroe

https://www.wsj.com/articles/nonbank-lenders-are-dominating-the-mortgage-market-11624367460

